Feature/mongodb transactions (#457)
ordina-jworks/ordina-jworks.github.io: _posts/2018-11-06-mongodb-transactions.md

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Relational vs. document database](#Relational-vs.-document-database)
3. [When to use transactions?](#when-to-use-transactions)
4. [Technical details](#technical-details)
5. [Practical](#practical)
6. [Best Practices](#best-practices)
5. [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Introduction
- [How and When to Use Multi-Document Distributed Transactions, Aly Cabral](https://mongodbeurope2018.sched.com/event/FmAR/how-and-when-to-use-multi-document-distributed-transactions)
- [MongoDB: Building a New Transactional Model, Keith Bostic](https://mongodbeurope2018.sched.com/event/FmAW/mongodb-building-a-new-transactional-model)

The sessions I was looking forward to the most at MongoDB Europe 2018 were the two sessions about multi-document transactions, the most talked about feature of the MongoDB 4.0 release.
In the morning I attended a session by Aly Cabral which was very practically oriented.
In the afternoon there was a more esoteric yet very interesting session by Keith Bostic who provided some insight into the inner workings of the WiredTiger storage engine and the difficulties the MongoDB team had to overcome to implement the new transaction model.

> To give some background, as a longtime Oracle DBA, I always found it odd that a database would lack what I had always considered a crucial database feature during my Oracle days, so I was naturally curious to know more about MongoDB's implementation and how it would compare to a typical relational database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To give some background, as a longtime Oracle DBA, I always found it odd that a database would lack what I had always considered a crucial database feature during my Oracle days.
So I was naturally curious to know more about MongoDB's implementation and how it would compare to a typical relational database.
```

Reviewer 2: Het is af te raden een zin met "So" te beginnen, grammaticaal is er niks mis met een samengestelde zin.

In this post we will explore how multi-document transactions are implemented in MongoDB, how the implementation is similar to a relational database system and where they differ.

## Relational vs. document database
As I learned through working with MongoDB the past two years, there is less need for multi-document transactions in MongoDB, and by extension, in document databases in general.
For the majority of use cases single document transactions suffice.

> This is because the data model you use with a document database, is quite different from what you would use with an RDBMS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because the data model you use with a document database is quite different from what you would use with an RDBMS.
```

The example that was given in Aly's presentation was the creation or invalidation of a customer's account, which would require an update to all of the customer's entities.

### Event logging or auditing
Consider the case where, for logging or auditing purposes, you want to create an event trail of all changes that happen to a certain document or collection and you want to store this event trail in another collection.

The event trail should be representative of what really occurred, so events that never occurred should not be logged nor should events that actually happened be lost.

The only way to achieve this is to put the update and the logging of the update inside the same transaction.

## Technical details
Now let's explore some of the more technical features of multi-document transactions.

### Atomicity
This is pretty straightforward.
In MongoDB transactions are atomic, which means that execution of multiple changes inside a transaction is an all-or-nothing deal: either all updates get committed, or none.

### Snapshot isolation
When you start a transaction, MongoDB creates a snapshot of the current state of the database.

> During your transaction, you will not see any updates made by other sessions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During your transaction you will not see any updates made by other sessions.
```

You are *isolated* from them.

> This guarantees that throughout the transaction, your session will see one consistent version of the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guarantees that throughout the transaction your session will see one consistent version of the data.
```

Internally MongoDB uses an update structure inside the WiredTiger cache to maintain this consistent view on the database.
This structure grows as writes occur to the database and is only cleaned out of the database once the transaction is committed or aborted.
The implication of this is that long running transactions or a high write volume can put pressure on the cache, so it's recommended to keep the duration of any transaction as low as possible.

> To minimize cache pressure, you can use the server parameter transactionLifeTimeLimitSeconds to set a sensible maximum transaction time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To minimize cache pressure, you can use the server parameter 'transactionLifeTimeLimitSeconds' to set a sensible maximum transaction time.
```

If a transaction runs for a longer time than this value, it will be aborted.
The default value is 60 seconds.

A sidenote for those DBAs or developers who are already familiar with Oracle: the update structure in the WiredTiger cache is similar to how rollback segments and undo tablespaces work in Oracle, except that the snapshot information is kept in memory instead of on disk and you don't have to manage it.

### Read your own writes
MongoDB guarantees that you can read any writes you make inside your transaction, even before they are committed.
It also guarantees that no other session can read your writes before they are committed.

Again, these writes are handled by the snapshot structure inside the WiredTiger cache.

### Write locks
When two sessions are trying to update the same document at the same time, you get a write conflict.
In MongoDB this conflict is handled by write locks.
There are basically two conflict scenarios:

- Before a *transaction* updates a document, it will try to acquire a write lock.

> If the document is already locked, the transaction will fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the document is already locked the transaction will fail.
```

- Before a *non-transactional operation* tries to update a document, it will try to acquire a write lock.

> If the document is already locked, the operation it will back off and retry until [MaxTimeMS](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/cursor.maxTimeMS/#cursor.maxTimeMS) is reached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the document is already locked, the operation will back off and retry until [MaxTimeMS](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/cursor.maxTimeMS/#cursor.maxTimeMS) is reached.
```

Currently you can only use multi-document transactions with replica sets.
Sharded clusters are not supported yet, though this feature is planned for a future release (4.1 perhaps?).

Due to the WiredTiger cache pressure, long running transactions can be problematic, but the MongoDB developers are working on improving this for future releases and plan to support transactions running for several hours or even days.

## Practical
As for semantics, the MongoDB developers thankfully chose not to reinvent the wheel.
Using transactions is similar to what most developers are used to on relational database systems.
The precise syntax varies per programming language, so you will have to do some RTFM to learn it, but it always comes down to the following steps:

1. Open session
2. Start transaction
3. Update multiple documents
4. Commit or abort transaction

For example, in Mongo Shell syntax a transaction typically looks like this:

```javascript
mySession = db.getMongo().startSession();
mySession.startTransaction();
mySession.getDatabase("mydb").coll1.insert({"foo" : "bar"});
mySession.getDatabase("mydb").coll2.insert({"hello" : "world"});
mySession.commitTransaction();
```

> One important thing to note here is that once we open the session on the first line, every subsequent action must use the session variable ("mySession" in this case), otherwise they will be simple update operations, not belonging to the transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One important thing to note here is that once we open the session on the first line, every subsequent action must use the session variable ("mySession" in this case), otherwise they will be simple update operations not belonging to the transaction.
```

- [How and When to Use Multi-Document Distributed Transactions, Aly Cabral](https://mongodbeurope2018.sched.com/event/FmAR/how-and-when-to-use-multi-document-distributed-transactions)
- [MongoDB: Building a New Transactional Model, Keith Bostic](https://mongodbeurope2018.sched.com/event/FmAW/mongodb-building-a-new-transactional-model)

The sessions I was looking forward to the most at MongoDB Europe 2018 were the two sessions about multi-document transactions, the most talked about feature of the MongoDB 4.0 release.
In the morning I attended a session by Aly Cabral which was very practically oriented.
In the afternoon there was a more esoteric yet very interesting session by Keith Bostic who provided some insight into the inner workings of the WiredTiger storage engine and the difficulties the MongoDB team had to overcome to implement the new transaction model.

To give some background, as a longtime Oracle DBA, I always found it odd that a database would lack what I had always considered a crucial database feature during my Oracle days.
So I was naturally curious to know more about MongoDB's implementation and how it would compare to a typical relational database.

> In this post we will explore how multi-document transactions are implemented in MongoDB, how the implementation is similar to a relational database system and where they differ.

Reviewer 2: "How the implementation is similar to a relational database system and where they differ." is een bijzin, en kan niet op zichzelf staan. Afsplitsen in een aparte zin is grammaticaal fout.

## Relational vs. document database

> As I learned through working with MongoDB the past two years, there is less need for multi-document transactions in MongoDB, and by extension, in document databases in general.

Reviewer 2: ok

For the majority of use cases single document transactions suffice.
This is because the data model you use with a document database is quite different from what you would use with an RDBMS.

In a relational database system you typically normalize data in order to avoid duplication.

> A single "entity" more often than not has data spanning multiple tables, so when you perform updates to a single entity you have to update multiple rows in multiple tables concurrently, which necessitates transactions.

Reviewer 2: Nodeloos beginnen van een zin met "So"

> In a document database like MongoDB though, you typically embed all data that represents one entity within a single document, in which case updates to that entity are also limited to a single document.

Reviewer 2: "In which case ..." is een bijzin en geen aparte zin. Dat moet dus grammaticaal bij de hoofzin blijven.

"though" wil ik ook behouden. Wijst op het contrast tussen wat ik hier stel, en het voorgaande. Zonder komma lijkt me hier .ook correcter.

You can see that there's less need for transactions.

In essence, the RDBMS approach prioritizes disk space efficiency above everything else whereas the MongoDB approach prioritizes ease of development and simplicity.

Nevertheless, there are some scenarios where you may want to use multi-document transactions even in a document database, so let's see what some of those scenarios might be...

## When to use transactions?

### Relationships
In the case that your datamodel does have relationships between separate entitites, you may want to use transactions to update both of them at the same time.

> An example of this could be a "customer" and a "car" that he owns.

Reviewer 2: ok

They are distinct entities, but there is a relationship between them in the form of ownership information.

> If you update the ownership information on the "customer" document, you probably need to update it on the "car" document (or documents) as well.

Reviewer 2: ok

The only way to do this with guaranteed consistency is through a multi-document transaction.

### Event processing
Another use case of transactions is event processing.

> When a certain event occurs, it may need to atomically create, update, delete several entities at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ok

The example that was given in Aly's presentation was the creation or invalidation of a customer's account, which would require an update to all of the customer's entities.

### Event logging or auditing

> Consider the case where, for logging or auditing purposes, you want to create an event trail of all changes that happen to a certain document or collection and you want to store this event trail in another collection.

Reviewer 2: ok

The event trail should be representative of what really occurred, so events that never occurred should not be logged nor should events that actually happened be lost.

The only way to achieve this is to put the update and the logging of the update inside the same transaction.

## Technical details
Now let's explore some of the more technical features of multi-document transactions.

### Atomicity
This is pretty straightforward.
In MongoDB transactions are atomic, which means that execution of multiple changes inside a transaction is an all-or-nothing deal: either all updates get committed, or none.

### Snapshot isolation
When you start a transaction, MongoDB creates a snapshot of the current state of the database.
During your transaction you will not see any updates made by other sessions.
You are *isolated* from them.
This guarantees that throughout the transaction your session will see one consistent version of the data.

Internally MongoDB uses an update structure inside the WiredTiger cache to maintain this consistent view on the database.

> This structure grows as writes occur to the database and is only cleaned out of the database once the transaction is committed or aborted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This structure grows as writes occur to the database and is only purged from the database once the transaction is committed or aborted.
```

Reviewer 2: ok

> The implication of this is that long running transactions or a high write volume can put pressure on the cache, so it's recommended to keep the duration of any transaction as low as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implication of this is that long running transactions or a high write volume can put pressure on the cache. 
So it is recommended to keep the duration of any transaction as low as possible.
```

Reviewer 2: Nodeloos starten van een zin met "So".

> To minimize cache pressure, you can use the server parameter 'transactionLifeTimeLimitSeconds' to set a sensible maximum transaction time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To minimize cache pressure, you can use the server parameter `transactionLifeTimeLimitSeconds` to set a sensible maximum transaction time.
```

If a transaction runs for a longer time than this value, it will be aborted.
The default value is 60 seconds.

> A sidenote for those DBAs or developers who are already familiar with Oracle: the update structure in the WiredTiger cache is similar to how rollback segments and undo tablespaces work in Oracle, except that the snapshot information is kept in memory instead of on disk and you don't have to manage it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A sidenote for those DBAs or developers who are already familiar with Oracle.
The update structure in the WiredTiger cache is similar to how rollback segments and undo tablespaces work in Oracle.
Except that the snapshot information is kept in memory instead of on disk and you don't have to manage it yourself.
```

Reviewer 2: Het dubbel punt staat op zijn plaats, een zin starten met 'except' is not done.

Again, these writes are handled by the snapshot structure inside the WiredTiger cache.

### Write locks
When two sessions are trying to update the same document at the same time, you get a write conflict.
In MongoDB this conflict is handled by write locks.
There are basically two conflict scenarios:

- Before a *transaction* updates a document, it will try to acquire a write lock.
If the document is already locked the transaction will fail.

- Before a *non-transactional operation* tries to update a document, it will try to acquire a write lock.
If the document is already locked, the operation will back off and retry until [MaxTimeMS](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/cursor.maxTimeMS/#cursor.maxTimeMS) is reached.

Note that reads never block writes.
MongoDB is also smart enough to recognize a so called no-op write: if the document you are trying to update was not changed by the update, it will not attempt to acquire a write lock.

### Limitations
Currently you can only use multi-document transactions with replica sets.
Sharded clusters are not supported yet, though this feature is planned for a future release (4.1 perhaps?).

> Due to the WiredTiger cache pressure, long running transactions can be problematic, but the MongoDB developers are working on improving this for future releases and plan to support transactions running for several hours or even days.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the WiredTiger cache pressure, long running transactions can be problematic.
But the MongoDB developers are working on improving this for future releases and plan to support transactions running for several hours or even days.
```

## Practical
As for semantics, the MongoDB developers thankfully chose not to reinvent the wheel.
Using transactions is similar to what most developers are used to on relational database systems.

> The precise syntax varies per programming language, so you will have to do some RTFM to learn it, but it always comes down to the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The precise syntax varies per programming language.
So you will have to do some RTFM to learn it, but it always comes down to the following steps:
```

1. Open session
2. Start transaction
3. Update multiple documents
4. Commit or abort transaction

For example, in Mongo Shell syntax a transaction typically looks like this:

```javascript
mySession = db.getMongo().startSession();
mySession.startTransaction();
mySession.getDatabase("mydb").coll1.insert({"foo" : "bar"});
mySession.getDatabase("mydb").coll2.insert({"hello" : "world"});
mySession.commitTransaction();
```

> One important thing to note here is that once we open the session on the first line, every subsequent action must use the session variable ("mySession" in this case), otherwise they will be simple update operations not belonging to the transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One important thing to note here is that once we open the session on the first line, every subsequent action must use the session variable (`mySession` in this case), otherwise they will be simple update operations not belonging to the transaction.
```
